---
title: Embedding ML Modules in Haskell
---

*Continutation from the previous post, [Haskell Types Are Not Abstract Enough](./posts/2016-07-07-typeclasses.html)*


In Haskell, implementations of typeclasses are carried in the data of the type. Instances are unique and therefore implicit in the type.

In ML, implementations are objects in their own right; they are values of the module language. These values are known as "structures".

We can model ML structures as *singleton data types*: these singletons are *implementation-carrying objects*. 
Signatures are implemented as *typeclasses*, but they constrain implementation-carriers instead of directly constraining types. 
We use *associated type families* to carry type information for implementations.

The following is a naive model of ML modules that fails to type check:

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE TypeFamilies #-}
{-# LANGUAGE ConstrainedClassMethods #-}
{-# LANGUAGE FlexibleContexts #-}
{-# LANGUAGE TypeFamilyDependencies #-}

module MLModules where

class MLMonoid m where
  type T m
  zero :: T m
  (<>) :: T m -> T m -> T m


data Add = Add
instance MLMonoid Add where
  type T AddMon = Int
  zero = 0
  (<>) = (+) 

data Mul = Mul
instance MLMonoid Mul where
  type T Mul = Mul 
  zero = 1
  (<>) = (*) 

-- WON'T TYPECHECK!!!
wonttypecheck :: Int
wonttypecheck = zero
```

The type error we get is:

```
Couldn't match expected type ‘T m’ with actual type ‘T m0’
      NB: ‘T’ is a type function, and may not be injective
      The type variable ‘m0’ is ambiguous
```

If we think of it intuitively, GHC is not telling us anything surprising. The meaning of `wonttypecheck` is totally ambigious; do we mean the additive monoid, or the multiplicative monoid? Nowhere did we encode the information of which instance our expression should resolve to.

```haskell
...
class MLMonoid m where
  type T m
  zero :: T m
  (<>) :: T m -> T m -> T m
...
```


One solution is to limit our type families to be injective, and use `-XTypeFamilyDependencies`. 

In the context of asssociated type families, that means our associated types must have unique sources, ie. we can only have one implementation of a signature per type. 

One can talk about signatures in signatures, i.e. APIs can refer to other APIs *modulo implementation*.


Modules are tools for abstraction, i.e. they separate implementation and signature in a way that one can build signatures. In ML terms, this is `structure` and `signature`.



We create singleton types that serve as witnesses that our type implements a module signature.



Choosing alternative implementations requires one to create not only different types, but also a whole corpus of conversion functions.

A prime example is how `Int` is not a monoid, because we can't choose whether we mean the additive monoid or the multiplicative monoid.
